Progress Report - August 2021 (#294)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-aug-2021/index.md

Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games Tokyo 2020
Mario Golf: Super Rush
Mario Kart 8 Deluxe
Mario Tennis Aces
Pokkén Tournament DX
Pokémon Sword & Shield (limited game functions by design)
Saints Row IV®: Re-Elected™
SAINTS ROW: THE THIRD - THE FULL PACKAGE
Splatoon 2 (works with auto-stub enabled)
Titan Quest

Not all the listed games work at the moment due to missing services or just not having the best compatibility right now, but gameplay proved stable in all working cases.

{{< imgs
	"./lan.png| It just works (Mario Kart 8 Deluxe)"
  >}}

Keep in mind that some games require certain button combinations to switch between LAN and Local Wireless modes. 
For example, `Mario Kart 8 Deluxe` needs holding L + R + presing the left analog trigger (L3) in the main menu to be able to create or join a LAN room.

[Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) later followed with [network interface cleanups](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6905).

## Smooth and glitch-less videos for the win

Thanks to the [introduction of VA-API](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6713) by [yzct12345](https://github.com/yzct12345) back in July, epicboy made it possible to 

> [use hardware video acceleration](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6846) to decode videos with [FFmpeg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FFmpeg) for different GPU and driver 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[use hardware video acceleration](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6846) to decode videos with [FFmpeg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FFmpeg) for all other compatible GPU and driver 
```

combinations.
Furthermore, yuzu will gracefully fall back to software decoding in case none of the combinations are supported.

This considerably speeds up the decoding process, improving the performance of the emulator when playing videos.

Currently, the following GPU decoders are implemented:

| GPU | WINDOWS | LINUX |
| :------: | :------: | :------: |
|NVIDIA | NVDEC/D3D11VA | NVDEC/VDPAU |
|AMD | D3D11VA | VA-API/VDPAU |
|INTEL | D3D11VA | VA-API |

Please note that, since the GPU used to decode videos isn't necessarily the same as the one used for rendering, NVDEC is preferred on Windows over D3D11VA, as the performance 

> experienced with the latter when the iGPU is used for decoding was lower.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
experienced with the latter when it defaults to using the iGPU for decoding was lower.
```

> Similarly, VA-API is preferred along with the integrated graphics card on Linux (when available), as it was reported that this combination yielded better performance than using 

Reviewer: This isn't confirmed to be 100% accurate, and yzct never got back to me with further testing of this claim.

the discrete GPU to decode videos.

> Next on the list, we have had reports of noise artefacts appearing in the videos of some games. Notably, those that were encoded with the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next on the list, we have had reports of noisy artifacts appearing in the videos of some games. Notably, those that were encoded with the 
```

`key-frames`, on the other hand, are decoded completely on their own, without relying on any reference.
Decoding a frame like this is a slower process, but it guarantees that the frame will be as clean of errors as possible, which is why they can be used as references.

As was previously mentioned, FFmpeg is used to decode videos.
In the case of the VP9 format, yuzu needs to send to it the raw bytes that will be decoded (i.e. the actual images that you see in the video), along with a header that contains 
metadata, such as the dimensions of the frame, whether it is a `key-frame`, or if it isn't, what frames are used as references when processing it, etc.

The information that constitutes this header is mapped to a buffer in memory.
And now, here's where things turn a bit funny.
For some reason, the information in this buffer — namely, that part of the header that specified what `key-frames` should be used as reference, would change inconsistently among 
`inter-frames`.
This led to a degradation on the quality of the video, as every interpolated frame would reference a different `key-frame`, leading to the creation of these infamous garbled noise 

> artefacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
artifacts.
```

know the value of `is_hidden_frame` beforehand.

What epicboy did was simply copy the first frame, so that essentially the first and second frame are the same, and thus, exploiting this fact, the header information can be passed 
to FFmpeg so it stops complaining.

Alas, the joys of software development are but infinite in this world.

## General bugfixes

You can’t predict how a bug will show up, sometimes they pop out like daisies. With the addition of Brazilian Portuguese as a language for the user interface, 
`Paper Mario: The Origami King` started to run only in Japanese, ignoring any user setting.

[Fixing the copy amount of `GetAvailableLanguageCodes`](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6793) was enough to solve this issue. Thanks Morph!

{{< imgs
	"./papermario.png| True native gameplay (Paper Mario: The Origami King)"
  >}}

[sankasan](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6795) gave `yuzu-cmd`, our command-line SDL2 alternative to the regular Qt yuzu, some additional love.
By correctly implementing `SDL_ShowCursor`, yuzu-cmd can now [properly hide the mouse cursor while in fullscreen](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6795). Thank you!

> Also regarding `yuzu-cmd`, in the past, while controller mappings and settings were working, the actual toggle to enable them was ignored. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also relating to `yuzu-cmd`, in the past, controller mappings and settings were working, but the toggle to enable them was ignored. 
```
Also not sure what is meant exactly by "toggle to enable them"

> [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq). [Reading the `connected` value as a boolean](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6816) was all it took to get past this misstep.

Reviewer: This. Reads very awkwardly.

> toast also found an issue in the logic of how per-game profiles were handled, only the default user profile was selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
toast also found an issue in the logic of how per-game profiles were handled: only the default user profile was ever selected.
```

[Some code changes, and now the currently selected user profile will be used](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6805).

> [gidoly](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6817) did his first ever pull request, fixing a small but arguably very important description.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[gidoly](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6817) opened his first ever pull request, fixing a small but arguably very important description.
```

> `Use Fast GPU time`, one of our options in the Advanced graphics tab, is a hack intended to improve compatibility with games that use dynamic resolution as a way to keep steady 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Use Fast GPU time`, one of the options in the Advanced Graphics tab, is a hack intended to improve compatibility with games that use dynamic resolution as a way to keep steady 
```

never hurts.

Tired of having to wait over 3 minutes for each change done to the texture cache section of the code, [yzct12345](https://github.com/yzct12345) 
[split out the definitions](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6820), reducing the build time to 30 seconds.

yzct12345 also found a [deadlock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deadlock) in our Single-Producer, Single Consumer queue, 
[and submitted a fix](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6868) to address this problem.
The work to rewrite this queue and make it Multi-Producer, Multi-Consumer has also been started, so hopefully we might see a follow-up next month.
If you’re confused about these "[Producer-Consumer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Producer%E2%80%93consumer_problem)" terms, just know that they basically describe how to tackle 
the access to a resource in a multi-core system, so that the processes that write into (produce), and those that read (consume) from a shared resource, are properly synchronized — 
in this case, the queue.

This adventurous developer also [optimized the UnswizzleTexture function](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6861), yielding a sweet speed gain.

> Swizzling refers to a technique used to optimize how they are stored in memory to minimize cache misses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swizzling refers to a technique used to optimize how textures are stored in memory to minimize cache misses.
```

The opposite operation, thus, would be to take a swizzled texture and reorganize it so it makes sense to humans.

Some time ago, toast detected a potential out-of-bounds access, which is a bug that occurs when the program accesses memory that is outside the range where it should be operating 
at that given moment.
The code in question is also part of the function used to unswizzle textures.
epicboy noticed that the root of the problem laid in the calculation of the frame buffer size, used to limit where the code should operate, 
[and fixed it on this PR](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6879), effectively eliminating the bug.

While inspecting yuzu manually and with the help of analysis tools, v1993 also found a number of small bugs in different parts of our codebase, such as a 
[misplaced break statement](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6884) in the kernel function `GetThreadContext()` — a human error that changed the logic of the algorithm, 
preventing it from behaving as intended.
In a similar vein, he also corrected a [copy-paste error](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6889) affecting the code of the software keyboard.

> v1993 also found another bug in the `GetSubmappedRange()` function, used to obtain the CPU memory segments from a GPU memory address, blinkhawk 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
v1993 also found another bug in the `GetSubmappedRange()` function, used to obtain the CPU memory segments from a GPU memory address, Blinkhawk 
```

[Fixing the copy amount of `GetAvailableLanguageCodes`](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6793) was enough to solve this issue. Thanks Morph!

{{< imgs
	"./papermario.png| True native gameplay (Paper Mario: The Origami King)"
  >}}

[sankasan](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6795) gave `yuzu-cmd`, our command-line SDL2 alternative to the regular Qt yuzu, some additional love.
By correctly implementing `SDL_ShowCursor`, yuzu-cmd can now [properly hide the mouse cursor while in fullscreen](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6795). Thank you!

Also relating to `yuzu-cmd`, in the past, while button mapping and other settings were working correctly, the toggle to enable the controller was being completely ignored.
[Reading the `connected` value as a boolean](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6816) was all it took to get past this misstep, thanks 
[toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq)!

toast also found an issue in the logic of how per-game profiles were handled: only the default user profile was ever selected.
[Some code changes, and now the currently selected user profile will be used](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6805).

> [gidoly](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6817) opened his first ever pull request, fixing a small but arguably very important description.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[gidoly](https://github.com/gidoly) opened his first ever pull request, fixing a small but arguably very important description.
```

`Use Fast GPU time`, one of the options in the Advanced Graphics tab, is a hack intended to improve compatibility with games that use dynamic resolution as a way to keep steady 
performance on the Switch. 

By lying to the kernel and informing that performance is always good, the emulator avoids unnecessary destruction and reconstruction of textures, saving both performance and VRAM.
As an added benefit, some games use this *totally-not-adulterated* information to constantly render at their highest supported resolution.

> For both these reasons we recommend users to keep this option always enabled, as no regressions have been found for using it, and the stability benefits on some particular titles 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For both these reasons we recommend users to keep this option always enabled, as no regressions have been found when using it, and the stability benefits on some particular titles 
```

like `Luigi’s Mansion 3` are more than worth it.

So, by calling a spade a spade, gidoly now informs us that `Use Fast GPU time` [is indeed a hack](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6817). Al pan, pan, y al vino, vino.

[Stubbing the `NGCT:U` service](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6927) allows `Boyfriend Dungeon` to boot. Good catch by [german77](https://github.com/german77).

{{< imgs
	"./boyfriend.png| Boyfriend Dungeon"
  >}}

epicboy [flipped the positions of `Limit Speed Percent` and `Framerate Cap`](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6839) in the configuration window. Tidying the user interface 
never hurts.

> Tired of having to wait over 3 minutes for each change done to the texture cache section of the code, [yzct12345](https://github.com/yzct12345) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Are there any developers tired of having to wait over 3 minutes to compile each change done to the texture cache section of the code? Well, [yzct12345](https://github.com/yzct12345) 
```

> [split out the definitions](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6820), reducing the build time to 30 seconds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[split out the definitions](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6820), reducing the build time to only 30 seconds.
```

> yzct12345 also found a [deadlock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deadlock) in our Single-Producer, Single Consumer queue, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
yzct12345 also found a [deadlock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deadlock) in our `Single-Producer, Single Consumer queue`, 
```

[and submitted a fix](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6868) to address this problem.

> The work to rewrite this queue and make it Multi-Producer, Multi-Consumer has also been started, so hopefully we might see a follow-up next month.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The work to rewrite this queue and make it `Multi-Producer, Multi-Consumer` has also been started, so hopefully we might see a follow-up next month.
```

If you’re confused about these "[Producer-Consumer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Producer%E2%80%93consumer_problem)" terms, just know that they basically describe how to tackle 
the access to a resource in a multi-core system, so that the processes that write into (produce), and those that read from (consume), a shared resource, are properly synchronized — 
in this case, the queue.

This adventurous developer also [optimized the UnswizzleTexture function](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6861), yielding a sweet speed gain.
Swizzling refers to a technique used to optimize how textures are stored in memory to minimize cache misses.
The opposite operation, thus, would be to take a swizzled texture and reorganize it so it makes sense to humans.

Some time ago, toast detected a potential out-of-bounds access, which is a bug that occurs when the program accesses memory that is outside the range where it should be operating 
at that given moment.
The code in question is also part of the function used to unswizzle textures.
epicboy noticed that the root of the problem laid in the calculation of the frame buffer size, used to limit where the code should operate, 

> [and fixed it on this PR](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6879), effectively eliminating the bug.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[and fixed it in this PR](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6879), effectively eliminating the bug.
```

While inspecting yuzu manually and with the help of analysis tools, v1993 also found a number of small bugs in different parts of our codebase, such as a 
[misplaced break statement](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6884) in the kernel function `GetThreadContext()` — a human error that changed the logic of the algorithm, 
preventing it from behaving as intended.
In a similar vein, he also corrected a [copy-paste error](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6889) affecting the code of the software keyboard.

> v1993 also found another bug in the `GetSubmappedRange()` function, used to obtain the CPU memory segments from a GPU memory address, Blinkhawk 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
v1993 also found another bug in the `GetSubmappedRange()` function, used to obtain the CPU memory segments from a GPU memory address. Blinkhawk 
```

[went ahead and fixed it](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6894).

> Another noteworthy change by blink is that he [changed the logic of the Garbage Collector](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6897), so that it uses a Least-Recently Used 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another noteworthy change by Blinkhawk is that he [changed the logic of the Garbage Collector](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6897), so that it uses a Least-Recently Used 
```

(`LRU`) cache instead.

> Previously, the cache of the GC would iterate over `n` textures every frame, checking whether they should be cleaned from memory or not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, the cache of the GC (Garbage Collector) would iterate over `n` textures every frame, checking whether they should be cleaned from memory or not.
```

It also used certain heuristics that would make the cleaning more aggressive towards certain kinds of textures, cleaning them without synchronizing with the host memory.

The `LRU` scheme, however, orders the textures based on how recently they were used.
Once the memory is full, the GC starts iterating over the elements of the `LRU` cache, eliminating the textures that haven't been used in the longest time.
Additionally, the GC now prioritizes eliminating textures that do not need to synchronize with the host memory, and only considers other textures once these have been emptied 
from the cache.
These changes make the new Garbage Collector more stable, so we can safely enable it by default for all users.

Meanwhile, [BreadFish64](https://github.com/BreadFish64) found that yuzu spent considerable CPU time running `GetHostThreadID()` — a function of the kernel used to manage threads 
— while profiling `Fire Emblem: Three Houses`, and [submitted a patch that optimized the generated code](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6878), providing a small performance 
boost.

# Input improvements

> german77 has a few input changes done this month.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
german77 implemented a few input changes this month.
```

First of all, when mapping and moving an analog stick, the previous implementation used to only show a blue dot representing the relative position of the analog stick.

> Now [a new green dot is added](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6815), which represents the emulated position of the stick, considering range and dead zones values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[A new green dot is now present](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6815), representing the emulated position of the stick, considering range and dead zones values.
```

> Useful to know if the stick actually reaches the whole input range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's useful to know if the stick actually reaches the whole input range.
```

{{< imgs
	"./stick.mp4| Remember to test and set both Range and Deadzone"
  >}}

> Next, the usual [update to SDL](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6855), which always brings some goodies, in this case:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, the usual [update to SDL](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6855), which always brings some goodies. In this case:
```

- The ability to send effects to DualSense triggers (not implemented at the moment).
- Better sensor data rate for Switch and PlayStation controllers.
- Added support for the Amazon Luna controller.
- Added rumble support for the Google Stadia controller.
- Improved rumble for the Pro Controller.

And finally, the Web Applet can cause the SDL process to die, [disabling an unnecessary feature](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6862) solves the issue.

## Future projects

{{< imgs
	"./art.png| 4K beach episode (Xenoblade Chronicles Definitive Edition)"
  >}}

> Progress on Project A.R.T. is going well, most major problems have been addressed, Morph had several eureka moments with Project Gaia, and other secret recipes are in the oven, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Progress on `Project A.R.T`. is going well, most major problems have been addressed. Morph had several eureka moments with Project Gaia. And now other secret recipes are in the oven, 
```

waiting their turn.

> That’s all folks! Thank you for your kind attention, happy playing, and see you next time!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That’s all folks! Thank you for your attention — happy playing, and see you next time!
```
